---
layout: post
title: "NOI '17 P3 Celebration"
tags: noi virtual-tree
---

### Statement 

[Problem Link](https://loj.ac/p/3534)

You are given a graph such that if vertex $x$ and vertex $y$ can reach vertex $z$, then either $x$ and reach $y$ or $y$ can reach $x$. You are also given $Q$ queries $(u, v)$ and $k$ new edges; find the number of vertices that could be on the path from vertex $u$ to vertex $v$.

* $1\leq N, Q\leq 3\cdot 10^5$
* $1\leq M\leq 6\cdot 10^5$
* $0\leq k\leq 2$

### Tests 1-7

* $1\leq N, Q\leq 1000$

Construct a new graph for each query and perform a DFS from $s$. Construct a reversed graph and DFS $t$. The answer is the number of vertices that is reachable from vertices $s$ and $t$.

With careful implementation, the time complexity is $\mathcal O(Q\cdot N)$.

### Tests 8-14

* The graph is a tree.

Construct a virtual tree using vertices $s$, $t$, and the endpoints of the newly added edges. Find the number of nodes between each edge in the virtual tree. Then, use the brute force solution from test cases 1-7.

By using $\mathcal O(1)$ LCA and sorting the vertices by their preorder time, the overall time complexity is $\mathcal O(N\log N + Q)$.

### Full Solution

First, let's group all the vertices by their SCC. Now, we have a DAG.

Notice that we haven't used the property yet. We can still make the DAG into a tree. Let's say that vertex $x$ and vertex $y$ can reach vertex $z$, and vertex $x$ can reach vertex $y$. We don't have to add the edge from $x$ to $z$ because $x$ can already reach $z$ from $x\rightarrow y\rightarrow z$. So, if we perform a BFS topological sort, we just need to add the tree edge $(u, v)$ for the latest vertex $v$ that enters vertex $u$.

Now that the graph is a tree, we use the solution for the tree case. The time complexity is $\mathcal O(N\log N + Q)$.

[Solution Link](https://loj.ac/s/1490703)